Mark Twain
Then the new boy said, “Enough!” Tom let him stand up and walk 
away.
But as soon as Tom turned, the new boy threw a stone, hitting Tom’s 
back. Therefore, Tom followed him home, and waited.
The boy did not come out again. His mother came and said that Tom 
was a bad child. She told him to go home.
It was late when Tom got there. Very quietly and carefully, he entered 
through a window.
But his aunt was waiting for him. She had learned from Sid about 
Tom’s afternoon. Now she saw his clothes and she knew that he had been 
fighting. She knew what she must do. Tom would work all day on Saturday.
4
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer
 THE SUMMER WORLD WAS BRIGHT
and fresh and full of life.
Tom appeared in front of the house with paint and a big 
brush
. 
He looked at the fence, and all joy left him. A deep sadness settled 
upon his heart. The fence was long and high. He wet the brush and 
moved it along the top board. He did it again, and did it again. He 
looked at what he had done. The painted part was very, very small. 
The whole fence was very large. He sat down. He felt that he could not 
continue.
Jim, a boy who worked for the family, came through the gate. He 
was going to get water, and he was singing happily.
Tom said, “Jim, I will get the water, if you will paint.”
Jim said, “No. I must get the water.”
“Are you afraid of Aunt Polly? She won’t hurt you. She talks 
about it, but talk never hurts. It never hurts except when she weeps, 
also. You should not be afraid of her. Jim, I will give you one of my play­
things. And I will show you my foot. I will show you where I hurt it.”
Jim was only human. He took the plaything and he put his head
5
Mark Twain
down to look at the foot.
In another moment he was running down the street. Tom was 
painting as fast as possible. And Aunt Polly was returning to the house.
But Tom began to think of the pleasure planned for this day. His 
hands moved more slowly. Soon the other boys would come and laugh 
at him for working. From his pocket he took everything that he owned. 
He looked at it. There was nothing of real value. It was not enough to 
buy another boy’s help.
At this dark moment, a wonderful idea came to him. It was like 
a great, bright light.
He took his brush and went quietly to work.
Ben Rogers appeared soon. Tom had been especially afraid of 
Ben’s laugh.
Ben was eating an apple. Also as he walked, he was making nois­
es like those of a big riverboat. He would shout loudly. Then he would 
say, “Ding
­
do
ng
­
do
ng,” like a bell. Then he would shout again, and say, 
“Ding
­
dong
­
do
ng,” again, and make other strange noises. He was the 
boat, and he was the captain of the boat, and the boat bell.
“Turn her!” he shouted. “Slow her! Stop!” He made a slow, care­
ful turn, came close beside Tom, and stopped.
Tom continued his painting. He did not look at the boat.
Ben said, “Hello! You are in trouble.”
No answer. Tom moved his brush gently, and looked at the result. 
Ben came nearer. Tom wished for the apple, but he did not turn from 
his work. Ben said:
“Hello, you must work, must you?”
Tom turned suddenly. “Oh, Ben, is it you? I did not see you.”
“I am going swimming, 
I
 am. Do you wish you could go with me? 
Or would you rather work?”
Tom said, “What do you mean? Work?”
“That is work.”
Tom returned to his painting. “It may be work and it may not be. 
But it is fine for Tom Sawyer.”
“Do you mean that you enjoy it?”
6
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer
“Enjoy it? Does a boy have a chance to paint a fence every day?”
Here was a new idea. Ben stopped eating his apple. Tom moved 
his brush—stepped away to look at the result—added a little paint here 
and there—stepped away again. Ben watched. He was more and more 
interested. Then he said:
“Tom, let me paint a little.”
Tom thought. Then he said, “No, Ben. Aunt Polly wants this 
fence to be perfect. If it was the fence behind the house, you could help. 
But this fence, beside the street, must be done very carefully. There is 
not one boy in a thousand who can do it well.”
“Oh, Tom, let me try. Only a little. I will be careful. Tom, I will 
give you part of my apple.”
“No, Ben. I am afraid—”
“I will give you all of it!”
Tom gave the brush to Ben slowly, but with joy in his heart. And, 
while the boy who a few moments before had been a riverboat worker 
and became hot in the sun, Tom sat under the tree, eating the apple 
and planning how to get more help.
There were enough boys. They came along the street, stopped to 
laugh, but remained to paint. After Ben, Bill Fisher painted. Then 
Johnny Miller came. Each one paid to be allowed to work. In the mid­
dle of the afternoon, Tom was very rich. He had many playthings, a 
small cat with one eye, a piece of broken blue glass, and much more.
And he had not worked, and the whole fence had been painted 
three times. There was no more paint. With more paint, Tom would 
soon have owned everything belonging to the other boys. And the 
other boys in the village would have owned nothing.
Tom had discovered a great law of human action. A man or a boy 
will desire something if it is not easy to get.
7
Mark Twain
     p
Tom as an Army Officer—
Delightful Sadness
T
OM WENT TO REPORT TO 
A
UNT 
P
OLLY. 
S
HE WAS SITTING BESIDE AN
open window. She was half asleep, and she was holding the sleeping 
cat. She was surprised to see Tom. She thought that he had run away 
from his work long ago.
Tom said, “May I go and play now, Aunt?”
“Already? How much have you done?”
“It is all done, Aunt.”
“Tom, is that true? It makes me sad if you do not tell the truth.”
“It is true, Aunt; it 
is
 all done.”
She went to see, and her surprise was very great. “You can work 
when you want to, Tom. But you do not often want to. Go and play. 
But remember to come home again.” And she gave him a large apple. 
She did not see him take a piece of cake as he passed through the 
kitchen.
Tom hurried to the center of the village. There two armies of boys 
had met for a battle. Tom was the leader, the General, of one army, and 
his good friend, Joe Harper, was the General of the other. Tom and Joe 
did not fight. They sat together and sent their orders to the armies.
8
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer
When the battle was finished, they agreed to have another battle on 
another day. Then the armies marched away, and Tom started to go 
home alone.
As he passed Jeff Thatcher’s house, he saw a new girl in the gar­
den. She had blue eyes and yellow hair. She was beautiful. Tom had 
loved a girl named Amy Lawrence. A week ago she had said that she 
loved him. He had been happy and proud. But now in a moment she 
was gone from his heart.
He watched the new girl until she discovered him. Then he looked 
at other places, as if he had not seen her. And he began to jump, and 
dance, and walk on his hands, so that she would continue to watch 
him.
She walked toward the house, and Tom’s heart was sad. But she 
threw a flower over the fence. Then she was gone.
Tom looked around. There was no person to see him. Slowly he 
picked up the flower. He put it under his shirt, near his heart.
And he stayed near the fence until darkness came.
Then he went home to eat. He was full of joy. His aunt wondered 
why.
Later that evening his brother Sid was a bad boy. He took some 
sweets. But his aunt did not believe that Sid could be bad. She gave 
Tom the blow that she should have given to Sid. She learned the truth 
later, and was sorry. But she said nothing to Tom.
Therefore, Tom was very sorry for himself. He began to wish that 
he would die. She would feel sorry then. He could see himself being 
carried home from the river, dead, his hair wet, his troubles past.
He went out into the darkness, and went to the river. It would be 
good to 
drown
—if he could drown without pain.
He thought of his flower, and took it from inside his shirt. Would 
the new girl be sad if he died? Would she put her arms around him? Or 
would she turn coldly away?
This picture brought him much delightful suffering. He kept it a 
long time in his mind.
Then he started home.
9
Mark Twain
He stopped near the Thatcher house. There was a light in one 
window. Was that the new girl’s room? He lay down on the ground 
below the window, with her flower in his hands. He would lie there 
and die in the cold. In the morning, she would look out the window, 
and see him.
The window opened suddenly. He heard the voice of a woman 
who worked for the Thatchers. She threw water out of the window, 
and it fell on him.
Tom jumped up and ran.
Sid opened his eyes and saw Tom, ready for bed, looking at his 
wet clothes. Tom’s wild eyes made Sid afraid. He did not dare to speak.
But he would remember and tell his aunt.